Accelerating Large-Scale Inference with Anisotropic Vector Quantization

Ruiqi Guo * 1 Philip Sun * 1 Erik Lindgren * 1 Quan Geng 1 David Simcha 1 Felix Chern 1 Sanjiv Kumar 1

Abstract
Quantization based techniques are the current
state-of-the-art for scaling maximum inner product search to massive databases. Traditional approaches to quantization aim to minimize the reconstruction error of the database points. Based
on the observation that for a given query, the
database points that have the largest inner products are more relevant, we develop a family
of anisotropic quantization loss functions. Under natural statistical assumptions, we show that
quantization with these loss functions leads to
a new variant of vector quantization that more
greatly penalizes the parallel component of a datapoint’s residual relative to its orthogonal component. The proposed approach, whose implementation is open-source, achieves state-of-theart results on the public benchmarks available at
ann-benchmarks.com.

1. Introduction
Maximum inner product search (MIPS) has become a popular paradigm for solving large scale classification and retrieval tasks. For example, in recommendation systems, user
queries and documents are embedded into a dense vector
space of the same dimensionality and MIPS is used to find
the most relevant documents given a user query (Cremonesi
et al., 2010). Similarly, in extreme classification tasks (Dean
et al., 2013), MIPS is used to predict the class label when
a large number of classes, often on the order of millions
or even billions are involved. Lately, MIPS has also been
applied to training tasks such as scalable gradient computation in large output spaces (Yen et al., 2018), efficient
sampling for speeding up softmax computation (Mussmann
and Ermon, 2016) and sparse updates in end-to-end trainable
memory systems (Pritzel et al., 2017).
To formally define the Maximum Inner Product Search
*
Equal contribution 1 Google Research. Correspondence to:
Philip Sun <sunphil@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

(MIPS) problem, consider a database X = {xi }i=1,2,...,n
with n datapoints, where each datapoint xi ∈ Rd in a ddimensional vector space. In the MIPS setup, given a query
q ∈ Rd , we would like to find the datapoint x ∈ X that
has the highest inner product with q, i.e., we would like to
identify
x∗i := arg maxhq, xi i.
xi ∈X

Exhaustively computing the exact inner product between q
and n datapoints is often expensive and sometimes infeasible. Several techniques have been proposed in the literature
based on hashing, graph search, or quantization to solve the
approximate maximum inner product search problem efficiently, and the quantization based techniques have shown
strong performance (Ge et al., 2014; Babenko and Lempitsky, 2014; Johnson et al., 2017).
In most traditional quantization works, the objective in the
quantization procedures is to minimize the reconstruction
error for the database points. We show this is a suboptimal
loss function for MIPS. This is because for a given query,
quantization error for database points that score higher, or
have larger inner products, is more important. Using this
intuition, we propose a new family of score-aware quantization loss functions and apply it to multiple quantization
techniques. Our contributions are as follows:
• We propose the score-aware quantization loss function.
The proposed loss can work under any weighting function of the inner product and regardless of whether the
datapoints vary in norm.
• Under natural statistical assumptions, we show that the
score-aware quantization loss can be efficiently calculated. The loss function leads to an anisotropic weighting that more greatly penalizes error parallel with the
datapoint than error orthogonal to the datapoint.
• The proposed loss is generally applicable to many quantization methods. We demonstrate the codebook learning and quantization procedures for product quantization and vector quantization can be efficiently adapted
to the proposed loss function.
• We show that anisotropic quantization leads to large
MIPS performance gains over reconstruction loss-

Accelerating Large-Scale Inference with Anisotropic Vector Quantization

based techniques. Our method achieves state-of-the-art
performance on standard large-scale benchmarks such
as Glove-1.2M. In addition to recall gains, anisotropic
quantization gives significantly more accurate inner
product value approximations.

2. Background and Related Works
2.1. Inference as Maximum Inner Product Search
Efficient maximum inner product search (MIPS) is necessary for many large-scale machine learning systems. One
popular approach to information retrieval systems and recommender systems uses representation learning in the embedding space. In this framework, we learn embedding
functions to map items to be retrieved in a common vector
space, where the items can be words, images, users, audio,
products, web pages, graph nodes, or anything of interest
(Cremonesi et al., 2010; Weston et al., 2010; Guo et al.,
2016a; Gillick et al., 2019; Wu et al., 2017).
In recommender systems, two networks are jointly trained
to generate query (user) vectors and item vectors, such that
embedding vectors of queries and relevant items have high
inner product when computed in the embedding space. To
perform inference, we first pre-compute a database of embedding vectors for items to be recommended. When a
query arrives, we compute the query embedding then return
the items with the highest inner product. In extreme classification, a neural network classifier is trained, where each
row of the weight matrix of the classification layer corresponds to the embedding of a class label (Dean et al., 2013;
Reddi et al., 2019). In both settings, the computationally
expensive operation is finding the item embedding that has
the largest inner product with the query embedding, which
can be efficiently solved by Maximum Inner Product Search
(MIPS).
2.2. Methods for accelerating MIPS
There is a large body of similarity search literature on max
inner product and nearest neighbor search. We refer readers
to (Wang et al., 2014; 2016) for a comprehensive survey.
We include a brief summary here.
There are two main tasks required to develop an efficient
MIPS system. One task is to reduce the number of items that
are scored to identify the top result. This is typically done
with a space partitioning method. The other task is improving the rate at which items are scored. This is typically done
with quantization, and is where the main contribution of
our work lies. Successful implementation of MIPS systems
requires good performance in both tasks.
Many researchers have developed high quality implementations of libraries for nearest neighbor search, such as SP-

TAG (Chen et al., 2018), FAISS (Johnson et al., 2017), and
hnswlib (Malkov and Yashunin, 2016). We compare with
the ones available on ANN-Benchmarks in Section 5.
2.2.1. R EDUCING THE N UMBER OF E VALUATIONS
One class of approaches to reducing the number of items
scored is space partitioning. These approaches partition
the space into different buckets. To perform MIPS in this
setting, we find the relevant buckets for a given query and
score only the items in these buckets.
Examples of this approach include tree search methods and
locality sensitive hashing. Tree search methods such as
(Muja and Lowe, 2014; Dasgupta and Freund, 2008) partition the space recursively, forming a tree. Locality sensitive
hashing (Shrivastava and Li, 2014; Neyshabur and Srebro,
2015; Indyk and Motwani, 1998; Andoni et al., 2015) partitions the space using a similarity-preserving hash function.
There is also a class of approaches based on graph search
(Malkov and Yashunin, 2016; Harwood and Drummond,
2016). These methods work by navigating a graph by greedily selecting the neighbor with the highest dot product.
2.2.2. Q UANTIZATION
Quantization is an important technique for building stateof-the-art MIPS systems in large scale settings. Below we
describe the several ways that quantization improves performance.
• Efficient dot product computations: We can calculate
the dot product of a d dimensional query vector with
n quantized points in time O(dk + mn) using look
up tables, where k is the size of each quantization
codebook and m is the number of codebooks. For
typical choices of k and m this is faster than the O(nd)
complexity required for exact computation.
• Memory bandwidth: modern processors need workloads with a high amount of computation per memory
read in order to fully utilize their resources. Quantization compresses datapoints, resulting in less memory
bandwidth usage and higher processor utilization.
• Storage: quantized datapoints take up less space in
memory or on disk. For large-scale datasets, this allows
more datapoints to be stored on a single machine.
One approach to quantization is with random projections
(Charikar, 2002; Vempala, 2005; Li and Li, 2019). One issue with random projections is that quantization is oblivious
to the data, and it may be more efficient to use a quantization
method that is able to exploit structure in the data. Quantization methods of this form are available for binary quantization (He et al., 2013; Liong et al., 2015; Dai et al., 2017),

Accelerating Large-Scale Inference with Anisotropic Vector Quantization

product quantization (Jegou et al., 2011; Guo et al., 2016b;
Zhang et al., 2014; Wu et al., 2017), additive quantization
(Babenko and Lempitsky, 2014; Martinez et al., 2018), and
ternary quantization (Zhu et al., 2016). We discuss product
quantization in more detail in Section 4. There are also
lines of work that focus on learning transformations before
quantization (Gong et al., 2013; Ge et al., 2014; Sablayrolles
et al., 2019). Learning quantization from the observed data
distribution also has been studied in (Marcheret et al., 2009;
Morozov and Babenko, 2019; Babenko et al., 2016).
Our work differs from the above methods as they essentially
focus on minimizing reconstruction error as a loss function, while we develop an approach in the following section
where we minimize a novel loss function that is designed to
improve the downstream MIPS objective.
We also highlight the work May et al. (2019), where they
consider quantization objectives for word embeddings that
improve the downstream performance of training models
for natural language processing tasks.

3. Problem Formulation
Common quantization techniques focus on minimizing the
reconstruction error (sum of squared error) when x is quantized to x̃. It can be shown that minimizing the reconstruction errors is equivalent to minimizing the expected inner
product quantization error under a mild condition on the
query distribution without assumption on the database point
distribution. Indeed, consider the quantization objective of
minimizing the expected total inner product quantization
errors over the query distribution:
Eq

n
X

2

(hq, xi i − hq, x̃i i) = Eq

i=1

n
X

hq, xi − x̃i i2 .

(1)

i=1

Under the assumption that q is isotropic, i.e., E[qq T ] = cI,
where I is the identity matrix and c ∈ R+ , the objective
function becomes
n
X
i=1

Eq hq, xi − x̃i i2 =

n
X

important since they are likely to be among the top ranked
pairs and can greatly affect the search result, while for the
pairs whose inner product is low the approximation error
matters much less. In other words, for a given datapoint x,
we should quantize it with a bigger focus on its error with
those queries which have high inner product with x. See
Figure 1 for the illustration.
Following this key observation, we propose the score-aware
quantization loss. This is a new loss function for quantization that weighs the inner product approximation error by
w, an arbitrary function of our choice that returns a weight
based on the value of the true inner product. Specifically,
we define the loss function as the following:
Definition 3.1. Given a datapoint xi , its quantization x̃i ,
and a weight function w : R 7→ R+ of the inner product
score, the score-aware quantization loss with respect to a
query distribution Q is defined as
`(xi , x̃i , w) = Eq∼Q [w(hq, xi i)hq, xi − x̃i i2 ].

Since the norm of q does not matter to the ranking result,
we can assume ||q|| = 1 without loss of generality. Similarly, assuming we have no prior knowledge of the query
distribution Q, we trivially assume q is uniformly spherically distributed. The expectation can be recomputed if Q
is known or estimated empirically.
3.1. Analyzing Score-Aware Quantization Loss
We show that regardless of the choice of w, a score-aware
quantization loss `(xi , x̃i , w) always decomposes into an
anisotropic weighted sum of the magnitudes of the parallel
and orthogonal residual errors. These two errors are defined
as follows: first, define the residual error of a quantization
x̃i as xi − x̃i . The parallel residual error is the component
of the residual error parallel to the datapoint xi ; it can be
computed as
rk (xi , x̃i ) =

Eq (xi − x̃i )T qq T (xi − x̃i )

i=1
n
X

=c

kxi − x̃i k2

i=1

Therefore, the objective becomes P
minimizing the reconstrucn
tion errors of the database points i=1 kxi − x̃i k2 , and this
has been considered extensively in the literature.
One key observation about the above objective function (1)
is that it takes expectation over all possible combinations of
datapoints x and queries q. However, it is easy to see that not
all pairs of (x, q) are equally important. The approximation
error on the pairs which have a high inner product is far more

(2)

h(xi − x̃i ), xi ixi
.
||xi ||2

Orthogonal residual error is defined analogously, and can
be computed as
r⊥ (xi , x̃i ) = (x − xi ) − rk (xi , x̃i ).
These two components are illustrated in Figure 1b. The relative weights of these two error components in contributing
to the score-aware loss are determined by the choice of w.
Theorem 3.2. Suppose we are given a datapoint xi , its
quantization x̃i , and a weight function w. Assuming that
query q is uniformly distributed in the d-dimensional unit
sphere, the score-aware quantization loss equals

Accelerating Large-Scale Inference with Anisotropic Vector Quantization

𝑞#

𝑥

𝑥

𝑐#

𝑞# 𝑥
𝑟(𝑥, 𝑐" )

𝑐$
𝑐%

𝑟( (𝑥, 𝑐" )

𝑟∥ (𝑥, 𝑐" )

More important
pair of (𝑞, 𝑥)

(a)

𝑐"

Closest quantizer
to 𝑥

(b)

Best quantizer
for 𝑞# , 𝑥

(c)

Figure 1. (a) Not all pairs of q and x are equally important: for x, it is more important to accurately quantize the inner product of hq1 , xi
than hq2 , xi or hq3 , xi, because hq1 , xi has a higher inner product and thus is more likely to be the maximum; (b) Quantization error of x
given one of its quantizer c2 can be decomposed to a parallel component rk and an orthogonal component r⊥ . (c) Graphical illustration of
the intuition behind Equation (2). Even if c3 is closer to x in terms of Euclidean distance, c2 is a better quantizer than c3 in terms of inner
product approximation error of hq1 , x − ci. Notice that c3 incur more parallel loss (rk ), while c2 incur more orthogonal loss (r⊥ ).

the dot product is above a threshold T . Since I(t ≥ T )
satisfies the conditions for Theorem 3.3, it effectively penalizes parallel quantization error more greatly than orthogonal
error. With this weight function, our expressions for hk and
h⊥ simplify to:

`(xi , x̃i , w) = hk (w, ||xi ||)||rk (xi , x̃i )||2
+ h⊥ (w, ||xi ||)||r⊥ (xi , x̃i )||2
with hk and h⊥ defined as follows:
Z π
hk := (d − 1)
w(||xi || cos θ)(sin
0
Z π
h⊥ :=
w(||xi || cos θ) sind θdθ.

Z arccos(T /||xi ||)
d−2

d

θ − sin θ)dθ

hk = (d − 1)
0
Z arccos(T /||xi ||)

h⊥ =

sind−2 θ − sind θdθ

sind θdθ

0

0

Proof. See Appendix Section 7.1.
Any weight function would work for the above proposed
loss. For the MIPS problem, it is intuitive to choose w so
that it puts greater weight on larger inner products. For
such w, we show that parallel quantization error is weighted
more heavily than orthogonal quantization error. This is
formalized below and illustrated in Figure 1.
Theorem 3.3. For any w such that w(t) = 0 for t < 0 and
w(t) is monotonically non-decreasing for t ≥ 0,
hk (w, ||xi ||) ≥ h⊥ (w, ||xi ||)
with equality if and only if w(t) is constant for t ∈
[−||xi ||, ||xi ||].

With w(t) = I(t ≥ T ), we have
`(xi , x̃i , w) = hk (w, ||xi ||)||rk (xi , x̃i )||2 +
h⊥ (w, ||xi ||)||r⊥ (xi , x̃i )||2
∝ η(w, ||xi ||)||rk (xi , x̃i )||2 + ||r⊥ (xi , x̃i )||2
where η(w, ||xi ||) :=

hk (w, ||xi ||)
.
h⊥ (w, ||xi ||)

We can recursively compute η(w = I(t ≥ T ), ||xi ||) as a
function of d analytically. Furthermore we can prove that
η
d−1 has an limit as d → ∞, as demonstrated empirically in
Figure 2. We can use this limit, which is easy to evaluate,
as a proxy of η in computing the proposed loss.
Theorem 3.4.
η(I(t ≥ T ), ||xi ||)
(T /||xi ||)2
=
d→∞
d−1
1 − (T /||xi ||)2
lim

Proof. See Appendix Section 7.2.
3.2. Special case of w(t) = I(t ≥ T )
One particular w of interest is the function w(t) = I(t ≥ T ).
This weight function only considers quantization loss when

(3)

Proof. See Appendix Section 7.3.
As special cases, when T = 0, η(I(t ≥ 0), ||xi ||) = 1
which implies parallel and orthogonal errors are weighted

Accelerating Large-Scale Inference with Anisotropic Vector Quantization

In order to construct the dictionary C, we need to optimize
the choice of codewords over the loss function. For `2 reconstruction loss, the optimization problem becomes
X
min
min
kxi − x̃i k2 .
c1 ,c2 ,...,ck ∈Rd

xi

x̃i ∈{c1 ,c2 ,...,ck }

This is exactly the well-studied k-means clustering objective,
which is often solved using Lloyd’s algorithm.

Figure 2. The ratio η(I(t ≥ T = 0.2), kxk = 1)/(d − 1) in
Theorem 3.4 computed analytically as a function of d quickly
approaches the limit defined in Equation (3).

equally.
When T = k|xi ||, we have η(I(t ≥
||xi ||), ||xi ||) = ∞ which indicates we should only consider parallel error.
Theorem 3.2 shows that the weight of each datapoint’s parallel and orthogonal quantization errors are dependent on
||xi ||. However, when the database has constant norm, i.e.
||xi || = c, we can use the following simplified form:
n
X

`(xi , x̃i , I(t ≥ T ))

If, as in the previous section, we have our loss function
`(x, x̃) = hi,k krk (xi , x̃i )k2 + hi,⊥ kr⊥ (xi , x̃i )k2 for appropriate scaling parameters hi,k , hi,⊥ , we obtain a new objective function we call the anisotropic vector quantization
problem.
Definition 4.1. Given a dataset x1 , x2 , . . . , xn of points in
Rd , scaling parameters hi,k , hi,⊥ for every datapoint xi , and
k codewords, the anisotropic vector quantization problem is
finding the k codewords that minimize the objective function
X
min
min
hi,k krk (xi , x̃i )k2
c1 ,...,ck

xi

x̃i ∈{c1 ,...,ck }

+hi,⊥ kr⊥ (xi , x̃i )k2 .
Next we develop an iterative algorithm to optimize the
anisotropic vector quantization problem. Similar to Lloyd’s
algorithm (Lloyd, 1982), our algorithm iterate between partition assignment step and codebook update step:

i=1

∝ η(w, c)

n
X
i=1

||rk (xi , x̃i )||2 +

n
X

||r⊥ (xi , x̃i )||2

i=1

4. Application to Quantization Techniques
In this section we consider the codebook learning and quantization procedure for our proposed anisotropic loss function. In the previous sections, we established that the loss
function, `(xi , x̃i , w) leads to a weighted combination of
parallel quantization error and orthogonal quantization error.
In practice, we can choose a fixed η according to the choice
of w such as the one suggested in Section 3.2.
In vector quantization, we first construct a dictionary C =
{c1 , c2 , . . . , ck }. To quantize a vector x we replace x with
one of the codewords. Typically, the quantized vector x̃ minimizes some loss function: x̃ = arg minc1 ,c2 ,...,ck L(xi , ci ).
After we quantize a database of n points, we can calculate
the dot product of a query vector q with all quantized points
in O(kd + n) time. This is much better than the O(nd)
time required for the original unquantized database. We
achieve the O(kd + n) runtime by computing a lookup table
containing the inner product of the q with each of the k
codewords in O(kd) time. We then do a table lookup for
each of the n datapoints to get their corresponding inner
products.

1. (Initialization Step) Initialize codewords c1 , c2 , . . . , ck
to be random datapoints sampled from x1 . . . xn .
2. (Partition Assignment Step) For each datapoint xi find
its codeword x̃i = arg minx̃i ∈{c1 ,...,ck } `(xi , x̃i ). This
can be done by enumerating all k possile choices of
codewords.
3. (Codebook Update Step) For every codeword cj , let
Xj be all datapoints xi such that x̃i = cj . Update cj
by
X
cj ← arg min
`(xi , c).
c∈Rd

xi ∈Xj

4. Repeat Step 2 and Step 3 until convergence to a fixed
point or maximum number of iteration is reached.
In each iteration, we need perform update step for each of
the codeword. Given a partition of the datapoints Xj , we
can find the optimal value of the codeword cj that minimizes
the following objective:
X
cj = arg min
hi,k krk (xi , c)k2 + hi,⊥ kr⊥ (xi , c)k2 .
c∈Rd

x∈Xj

(4)
By setting gradient respect to cj to zero, we obtain the
following update rule:

Accelerating Large-Scale Inference with Anisotropic Vector Quantization

Theorem 4.2. Optimal codeword cj can be obtained in
closed form by solving the optimization problem in Equation
(4) for a partition Xj . The update rule for the codebook is
c∗j =

I

X

to find the M dictionaries that minimizes
X
min
min
hi,k krk (xi , x̃i )k2
Q
C (m) ⊆Rd/M x x̃i ∈
i
|C (m) |=k

mC

(m)

+ hi,⊥ kr⊥ (xi , x̃i )k2 .

hi,⊥ +

xi ∈Xj

X hi,k − hi,⊥
xi xTi
||xi ||2

xi ∈Xj

!−1
X

hi,⊥ xi

xi ∈Xj

Proof. See Section 7.4 of the Appendix for the proof.
As expected, we see that when all hi,k = hi,⊥ , our codeword update is equivalent to finding the weighted average
of the partition. Furthermore, if w(t) = 1, the update rule
becomes finding the average of datapoints in the partition,
same as standard k-means update rule. Additionally, since
there are only a finite number of partitions and at every
iteration the loss function decreases or stays constant, our
solution will eventually converge to a fixed point.
4.1. Product Quantization
In vector quantization with a dictionary of size k, we quantize each datapoint into one of k possible codewords. We
can think of this as encoding each datapoint with one dimension with k possible states.
With product quantization we encode each datapoint into
an M dimensional codeword, each with k possible states.
This allows us to represent k M possible codewords, which
would not be scalable with vector quantization. To do this,
we split each datapoint x into M subspaces each of dimension d/M : x = (x(1) , x(2) , . . . , x(m) ). We then create M
dictionaries C (1) , C (2) , . . . , C (m) , each with k codewords
of dimension d/M . Each datapoint would then be encoded
with M dimensions, with every dimension taking one of k
states.
To calculate distances with product quantization, for every
dictionary C (m) we calculate the partial dot product of the
relevant subspace of the query with every codeword in the
dictionary. The final dot product is obtain by sum up all M
partial dot product. We can then calculate the dot product
with m quantized datapoints in time O(kd + mn).
Using our anisotropic loss function `(xi , x̃i ) =
hi,k krk (xi , x̃i )k2 + hi,⊥ kr⊥ (xi , x̃i )k2 we obtain a new
objective function for product quantization we call the
anisotropic product quantization problem.
Definition 4.3. Given a dataset x1 , x2 , . . . , xn of points
in Rd , a scaling parameter η, a number M of dictionaries
each with elements of size d/M and k codewords in each
dictionary, the anisotropic product quantization problem is

We again consider an iterative algorithm for the problem.
We first initialize all quantized datapoints with some element from every dictionary. We then consider the following
iterative procedure:
1. (Initialization Step) Select a dictionary C (m) by sam(m)
(m)
pling from {x1 , . . . xn }.
2. (Partition Assignment Step) For each datapoint xi , update x̃i by using the value of c ∈ C (m) that minimizes
the anisotropic loss of x̃i .
3. (Codebook Update Step) Optimize the loss function
over all codewords in all dictionaries while keeping
every dictionaries partitions constant.
4. Repeat Step 2 and Step 3 until convergence to a fixed
point or maximum number of iteration is reached.
We can perform the update step efficiently since once the
partitions are fixed the update step minimizes a convex loss,
similar to that of vector quantization. We include details in
Section 7.5 of the Appendix. Additionally, since there are a
finite number of partition assignment and at every step the
loss function decreases or stays constant, our solution will
eventually converge to a fixed point. We note that we can
also optionally initialize the codebook by first training the
codebook under regular `2 -reconstruction loss, which speed
up training process.

5. Experiments
In this section, we show our proposed quantization objective
leads to improved performance on maximum inner product search. First, we fix the quantization mechanism and
compare traditional reconstruction loss with our proposed
loss to show that score-aware loss leads to better retrieval
performance and more accurate estimation of maximum
inner product values. Next, we compare in fixed-bit-rate
settings against QUIPS and LSQ, which are the current
state-of-the-art for many MIPS tasks. Finally, we analyze
the end-to-end MIPS retrieval performance of our algorithm
in terms of its speed-recall trade-off in a standardized hardware environment. We used the benchmark setup from
ann-benchmarks.com, which provides 11 competitive
baselines with pre-tuned parameters. We plot each algorithm’s speed-recall curve and show ours achieves the stateof-the-art.

Accelerating Large-Scale Inference with Anisotropic Vector Quantization

(a)

(b)

quantization with reconstruction loss. We then quantize
datapoints two ways, first by minimizing reconstruction
loss and then by minimizing score-aware loss. We see that
score-aware quantization loss achieves significant recall
gains as long as T is chosen reasonably. For all subsequent
experiments, we set T = 0.2, which by the limit in Equation
(3) corresponds to a value of η = 4.125.
Next we look at the accuracy of the estimated top-1 inner
product as measured by relative error: | hq,xi−hq,x̃i
|. This
hq,xi
is important in application scenarios where an accurate estimate of hq, xi is needed, such as softmax approximation,
where the inner product values are often logits later used
to compute probabilities. One direct consequence of scoreaware loss functions is that the objective weighs pairs by
their importance and thus leads to lower estimation error on
top-ranking pairs. We see in Figure. 3b that our score-aware
loss leads to smaller relative error over all bitrate settings.
Datasets other than Glove demonstrate similar performance
gains from score-aware quantization loss. See Section 7.6
of the Appendix for results on the Amazon-670k extreme
classification dataset.
5.2. Maximum inner product search retrieval

Figure 3. (a) The retrieval Recall1@10 for different values of
the threshold T . We see that for T = 0.2 (corresponding to
η = 4.125) our proposed score-aware quantization loss achieves
significantly better Recall than traditional reconstruction loss. (b)
The relative error of inner product estimation for true Top-1 on
Glove1.2M dataset across multiple number of bits settings. We
see that our proposed score-aware quantization loss reduces the
relative error compared to reconstruction loss.

5.1. Direct comparison with reconstruction loss
We compare our proposed score-aware quantization loss
with the traditional reconstruction loss by fixing all parameters other than the loss function in the following experiments.
We use Glove1.2M which is a collection of 1.2 million
100-dimensional word embeddings trained as described in
(Pennington et al., 2014). See Section 7.8 of the Appendix
for our rationale for choosing this dataset. For all experiments we choose w(t) = I(t ≥ T ). The Glove dataset is
meant to be used with a cosine distance similarity metric,
while our algorithm is designed for the more general MIPS
task. MIPS is equivalent to cosine similarity search when
all datapoints are equal-norm, so we adopt our technique to
cosine similarity search by unit-normalizing all datapoints
at training time.
We first compare the two losses by their Recall1@10 when
used for product quantization on Glove1.2M, as shown
in Figure. 3a. We learn a dictionary by optimizing product

Next, we compare our MIPS retrieval performance against
other quantization techniques at equal bitrate. We compare to LSQ (Martinez et al., 2018) and all three variants
of QUIPS (Guo et al., 2016b). In Figure 4a we measure
the performance at fixed bitrates of 100 and 200 bits per
datapoint. Our metric is Recall 1@N, which corresponds to
the proportion of queries where the top N retrieved results
contain the true top-1 datapoint. Our algorithm using scoreaware loss outperforms other algorithms at both bitrates and
all ranges of N .
Other quantization methods may also benefit from using
score-aware quantization loss. For example, binary quantization techniques such as (Dai et al., 2017) use reconstruction loss in their original paper, but can be easily adapted to
the proposed loss by a one line change to the loss objective.
We show results which illustrate the improvement of such a
change in Section 7.7 of Appendix.
5.3. Recall-Speed benchmark
Fixed-bit-rate experiments mostly compare asymptotic behavior and often overlook preprocessing overhead such
as learned rotation or lookup table computation, which
can be substantial. To evaluate effectiveness of MIPS algorithms in a realistic setting, it is important to perform
end-to-end benchmarks and compare speed-recall curves.
We adopted the methodology of public benchmark ANNBenchmarks (Aumüller et al., 2019), which plots a comprehensive set of 11 algorithms for comparison, including

Accelerating Large-Scale Inference with Anisotropic Vector Quantization
Recall-Query per second (1/s) tradeoff - up and to the right is better
9000

8000

Queries per second (1/s)

7000

6000

5000

4000

3000

2000

1000

0

0.86

0.88

0.9

annoy
faiss-ivf
hnsw(faiss)
hnswlib

(a) MIPS recall on Glove1.2M.

0.92

0.94

Recall (k=10)
mrpt
NGT-panng
NGT-onng
kgraph

0.96

0.98

1

hnsw(nmslib)
rpforest
SW-graph(nmslib)
ours

(b) Speed-recall trade-off on Glove1.2M Recall 10@10.

Figure 4. (a) Recall 1@N curve on Glove1.2M comparing with variants of QUIPS (Guo et al., 2016b) and LSQ (Martinez et al., 2018)
on MIPS tasks. We see that our method improves over all of these methods. (b) Recall-Speed benchmark with 11 baselines from (Aumüller
et al., 2019) on Glove1.2M. The parameters of each baseline are pre-tuned and released on: http://ann-benchmarks.com/.
We see that our approach is the fastest in the high recall regime.

faiss (Johnson et al., 2017) and hnswlib (Malkov and
Yashunin, 2016).
Our benchmarks are all conducted on an Intel Xeon W-2135
with a single CPU thread, and followed the benchmark’s protocol. Our implementation builds on product quantization
with the proposed quantization and SIMD based ADC (Guo
et al., 2016b) for distance computation. This is further
combined with a vector quantization based tree (Wu et al.,
2017). Our implementation is open-source and available
at
https://github.com/google-research/
google-research/tree/master/scann
and
furthermore the exact configurations used to produce our
benchmark numbers are part of the ANN-Benchmarks
GitHub repository. Figure 4b shows our performance on
Glove1.2M significantly outperforms competing methods
in the high-recall region.

6. Conclusion
In this paper, we propose a new quantization loss function
for inner product search, which replaces traditional reconstruction error. The new loss function is weighted based on
the inner product values, giving more weight to the pairs
of query and database points with higher inner product val-

ues. The proposed loss function is theoretically proven and
can be applied to a wide range of quantization methods,
for example product and binary quantization. Our experiments show superior performance on retrieval recall and
inner product value estimation compared to methods that
use reconstruction error. The speed-recall benchmark on
public datasets further indicates that the proposed method
outperforms state-of-the-art baselines which are known to
be hard to beat.

References
Alexandr Andoni, Piotr Indyk, Thijs Laarhoven, Ilya Razenshteyn, and Ludwig Schmidt. Practical and optimal lsh
for angular distance. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, pages 1225–1233, 2015.
Martin Aumüller, Erik Bernhardsson, and Alexander Faithfull. Ann-benchmarks: A benchmarking tool for approximate nearest neighbor algorithms. Information Systems,
2019.
Artem Babenko and Victor Lempitsky. Additive quantization for extreme vector compression. In Computer Vision

Accelerating Large-Scale Inference with Anisotropic Vector Quantization

and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2014 IEEE Conference
on, pages 931–938. IEEE, 2014.
Artem Babenko, Relja Arandjelović, and Victor Lempitsky.
Pairwise quantization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.01550,
2016.
Kush Bhatia, Himanshu Jain, Purushottam Kar, Manik
Varma, and Prateek Jain. Sparse local embeddings for
extreme multi-label classification. In Advances in neural
information processing systems, pages 730–738, 2015.
Miguel A Carreira-Perpinán and Ramin Raziperchikolaei.
Hashing with binary autoencoders. In Proceedings of the
IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 557–566, 2015.
Moses S Charikar. Similarity estimation techniques from
rounding algorithms. In Proceedings of the thiry-fourth
annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pages
380–388, 2002.
Qi Chen, Haidong Wang, Mingqin Li, Gang Ren, Scarlett Li, Jeffery Zhu, Jason Li, Chuanjie Liu, Lintao
Zhang, and Jingdong Wang. SPTAG: A library for
fast approximate nearest neighbor search, 2018. URL
https://github.com/Microsoft/SPTAG.
Paolo Cremonesi, Yehuda Koren, and Roberto Turrin. Performance of recommender algorithms on top-n recommendation tasks. In Proceedings of the Fourth ACM Conference on Recommender Systems, pages 39–46, 2010.
Bo Dai, Ruiqi Guo, Sanjiv Kumar, Niao He, and Le Song.
Stochastic generative hashing. In Proceedings of the 34th
International Conference on Machine Learning-Volume
70, pages 913–922. JMLR. org, 2017.
Sanjoy Dasgupta and Yoav Freund. Random projection trees
and low dimensional manifolds. In Proceedings of the
fortieth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing,
pages 537–546. ACM, 2008.
Thomas Dean, Mark Ruzon, Mark Segal, Jonathon Shlens,
Sudheendra Vijayanarasimhan, and Jay Yagnik. Fast,
accurate detection of 100,000 object classes on a single
machine: Technical supplement. In Proceedings of IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2013.
T. Ge, K. He, Q. Ke, and J. Sun. Optimized product quantization. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence, 36(4):744–755, April 2014. ISSN
0162-8828. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2013.240.
Dan Gillick, Sayali Kulkarni, Larry Lansing, Alessandro
Presta, Jason Baldridge, Eugene Ie, and Diego GarciaOlano. Learning dense representations for entity retrieval.

In Proceedings of the 23rd Conference on Computational
Natural Language Learning (CoNLL), pages 528–537,
2019.
Yunchao Gong, Svetlana Lazebnik, Albert Gordo, and Florent Perronnin. Iterative quantization: A procrustean
approach to learning binary codes for large-scale image
retrieval. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence, 35(12):2916–2929, 2013.
Jiafeng Guo, Yixing Fan, Qingyao Ai, and W Bruce Croft.
A deep relevance matching model for ad-hoc retrieval. In
Proceedings of the 25th ACM International on Conference on Information and Knowledge Management, pages
55–64, 2016a.
Ruiqi Guo, Sanjiv Kumar, Krzysztof Choromanski, and
David Simcha. Quantization based fast inner product
search. In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, AISTATS
2016, Cadiz, Spain, May 9-11, 2016, pages 482–490,
2016b. URL http://jmlr.org/proceedings/
papers/v51/guo16a.html.
Ben Harwood and Tom Drummond. FANNG: Fast approximate nearest neighbour graphs. In Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2016 IEEE Conference on,
pages 5713–5722. IEEE, 2016.
Kaiming He, Fang Wen, and Jian Sun. K-means hashing:
An affinity-preserving quantization method for learning
binary compact codes. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages
2938–2945, 2013.
Piotr Indyk and Rajeev Motwani. Approximate nearest
neighbors: towards removing the curse of dimensionality.
In Proceedings of the thirtieth annual ACM symposium
on Theory of computing, pages 604–613. ACM, 1998.
Herve Jegou, Matthijs Douze, and Cordelia Schmid. Product
quantization for nearest neighbor search. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 33(1):
117–128, 2011.
Jeff Johnson, Matthijs Douze, and Hervé Jégou. Billionscale similarity search with gpus. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1702.08734, 2017.
Xiaoyun Li and Ping Li. Random projections with asymmetric quantization. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, pages 10857–10866, 2019.
Venice Erin Liong, Jiwen Lu, Gang Wang, Pierre Moulin,
and Jie Zhou. Deep hashing for compact binary codes
learning. In The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), June 2015.

Accelerating Large-Scale Inference with Anisotropic Vector Quantization

Stuart Lloyd. Least squares quantization in pcm. IEEE
transactions on information theory, 28(2):129–137, 1982.
Yury A. Malkov and D. A. Yashunin. Efficient and robust approximate nearest neighbor search using hierarchical navigable small world graphs. CoRR, abs/1603.09320, 2016.
URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1603.09320.
E. Marcheret, V. Goel, and P. A. Olsen. Optimal quantization and bit allocation for compressing large discriminative feature space transforms. In 2009 IEEE Workshop
on Automatic Speech Recognition Understanding, pages
64–69, Nov 2009.
Julieta Martinez, Shobhit Zakhmi, Holger H Hoos, and
James J Little. Lsq++: Lower running time and higher
recall in multi-codebook quantization. In Proceedings of
the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV),
pages 491–506, 2018.
Avner May, Jian Zhang, Tri Dao, and Christopher Ré. On
the downstream performance of compressed word embeddings. In Advances in neural information processing
systems, pages 11782–11793, 2019.
Stanislav Morozov and Artem Babenko. Unsupervised neural quantization for compressed-domain similarity search.
In The IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), October 2019.

mining for learning with large output spaces. In The 22nd
International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
Statistics, pages 1940–1949, 2019.
Alexandre Sablayrolles, Matthijs Douze, Cordelia Schmid,
and Herv Jgou. Spreading vectors for similarity search.
In International Conference on Learning Representations,
2019. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
id=SkGuG2R5tm.
Anshumali Shrivastava and Ping Li. Asymmetric lsh (alsh)
for sublinear time maximum inner product search (mips).
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
pages 2321–2329, 2014.
Santosh S Vempala. The random projection method, volume 65. American Mathematical Soc., 2005.
Jingdong Wang, Heng Tao Shen, Jingkuan Song, and Jianqiu
Ji. Hashing for similarity search: A survey. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1408.2927, 2014.
Jun Wang, Wei Liu, Sanjiv Kumar, and Shih-Fu Chang.
Learning to hash for indexing big data survey. Proceedings of the IEEE, 104(1):34–57, 2016.
Jason Weston, Samy Bengio, and Nicolas Usunier. Large
scale image annotation: learning to rank with joint wordimage embeddings. Machine learning, 81(1):21–35,
2010.

Marius Muja and David G Lowe. Scalable nearest neighbor
algorithms for high dimensional data. IEEE Transactions
on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 36(11):
2227–2240, 2014.

L. Wu, A. Fisch, S. Chopra, K. Adams, A. Bordes, and
J. Weston. Starspace: Embed all the things! arXiv
preprint arXiv:1709.03856, 2017.

Stephen Mussmann and Stefano Ermon. Learning and inference via maximum inner product search. In Proceedings
of The 33rd International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 48, pages 2587–2596, 2016.

Xiang Wu, Ruiqi Guo, Ananda Theertha Suresh, Sanjiv Kumar, Daniel N Holtmann-Rice, David Simcha, and Felix
Yu. Multiscale quantization for fast similarity search. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30,
pages 5745–5755. 2017.

Behnam Neyshabur and Nathan Srebro. On symmetric and
asymmetric lshs for inner product search. In International
Conference on Machine Learning, 2015.
Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher D.
Manning. Glove: Global vectors for word representation.
In Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP), pages 1532–1543, 2014.
Alexander Pritzel, Benigno Uria, Sriram Srinivasan,
Adrià Puigdomènech Badia, Oriol Vinyals, Demis Hassabis, Daan Wierstra, and Charles Blundell. Neural
episodic control. In Proceedings of the 34th International
Conference on Machine Learning, volume 70, pages
2827–2836, 2017.
Sashank J Reddi, Satyen Kale, Felix Yu, Daniel HoltmannRice, Jiecao Chen, and Sanjiv Kumar. Stochastic negative

Ian En-Hsu Yen, Satyen Kale, Felix Yu, Daniel HoltmannRice, Sanjiv Kumar, and Pradeep Ravikumar. Loss decomposition for fast learning in large output spaces. In
Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 80, pages 5640–5649, 2018.
Ting Zhang, Chao Du, and Jingdong Wang. Composite
quantization for approximate nearest neighbor search. In
ICML, volume 2, page 3, 2014.
Chenzhuo Zhu, Song Han, Huizi Mao, and William J
Dally. Trained ternary quantization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1612.01064, 2016.

